Activity 4.1
A. Comb dry hair. Does the comb then
attract small pieces of paper?
B. Rub a glass rod with a silk cloth and
bring the rod near an inflated balloon.
Observe what happens.
A
RE OF THE TOM
From these activities, can we conclude
that on rubbing two objects together, they
become electrically charged? Where does this
charge come from? This question can be
answered by knowing that an atom is divisible
and consists of charged particles.
Many scientists contributed in revealing
the presence of charged particles in an atom.
It was known by 1900 that the atom was
indivisible particle but contained at least one
sub-atomic particle – the electron identified by
J.J. Thomson. Even before the electron was
identified, E. Goldstein in 1886 discovered the
presence of new radiations in a gas discharge
and called them canal rays. These rays were
positively charged radiations which ultimately
led to the discovery of another sub-atomic
particle. This sub-atomic particle had a charge,
equal in magnitude but opposite in sign to that
of the electron. Its mass was approximately
2000 times as that of the electron. It was given
the name of proton. In general, an electron is
represented as ‘e–’ and a proton as ‘p+’. The
mass of a proton is taken as one unit and its
charge as plus one. The mass of an electron is
considered to be negligible and its charge is
minus one.
It seemed that an atom was composed of
protons and electrons, mutually balancing
their charges. It also appeared that the protons
were in the interior of the atom, for whereas
electrons could easily be removed off but
not protons. Now the big question was:
what sort of structure did these particles of
the atom form? We will find the answer to
this question below.

Activity 4.2
Make a static atomic model displaying
electronic configuration of the first
eighteen elements.
42
The composition of atoms of the first
eighteen elements is given in Table 4.1.
uestions
1. Write the distribution of electrons
in carbon and sodium atoms.
2. If K and L shells of an atom are
full, then what would be the total
number of electrons in the atom?