Activity 5.1
Let us take a small piece from an onion
bulb. With the help of a pair of forceps,
we can peel off the skin (called
epidermis) from the concave side (inner
layer) of the onion. This layer can be
put immediately in a watch-glass
containing water. This will prevent the
peel from getting folded or getting dry.
What do we do with this peel?
Let us take a glass slide, put a drop of
water on it and transfer a small piece
of the peel from the watch glass to the
slide. Make sure that the peel is
perfectly flat on the slide. A thin camel
hair paintbrush might be necessary to
help transfer the peel. Now we put a
drop of safranin solution on this piece
followed by a cover slip. Take care to
U             L
AL NIT OF IFE
avoid air bubbles while putting the
cover slip with the help of a mounting
needle. Ask your teacher for help. We
have prepared a temporary mount of
onion peel. We can observe this slide
under low power followed by high
powers of a compound microscope.
Eyepiece
Coarse adjustment
Body tube
Fine adjustment
Arm
Clip         Objective lens
Microscope slide
Stage
Swivel
Condenser
Mirror
Base
What do we observe as we look through
the lens? Can we draw the structures that
we are able to see through the microscope,
on an observation sheet? Does it look like
Nucleus
Cells
50
wonk
ot
eroM
We can try preparing temporary mounts
of peels of onions of different sizes. What do
we observe? Do we see similar structures or
different structures?
What are these structures?
These structures look similar to each other.
Together they form a big structure like an
onion bulb! We find from this activity that
onion bulbs of different sizes have similar
small structures visible under a microscope.
The cells of the onion peel will all look the
same, regardless of the size of the onion they
came from.
These small structures that we see are
the basic building units of the onion bulb.
These structures are called cells. Not only
onions, but all organisms that we observe
around are made up of cells. However, there
are also single cells that live on their own.
Cells were first discovered by
Robert Hooke in 1665. He observed
the cells in a cork slice with the help
of  a  primitive microscope.
Leeuwenhoek (1674), with the
improved microscope, discovered the
free living cells in pond water for the
first time. It was Robert Brown in
1831 who discovered the nucleus in
the cell. Purkinje in 1839 coined the
term ‘protoplasm’ for the fluid
substance of the cell. The cell theory,
that all the plants and animals are
composed of cells and that the cell is
the basic unit of life, was presented
by two biologists, Schleiden (1838)
and Schwann (1839). The cell theory
was further expanded by Virchow
(1855) by suggesting that all cells
arise from pre-existing cells. With the
discovery of the electron microscope
in 1940, it was possible to observe and
understand the complex structure of
the cell and its various organelles.
The invention of magnifying lenses led to
the discovery of the microscopic world. It is
now known that a single cell may constitute
a whole organism  as in Amoeba,
Chlamydomonas, Paramoecium and bacteria.
These organisms are called unicellular
organisms (uni = single). On the other hand,
many cells group together in a single body
and assume different functions in it to form
various body parts in multicellular organisms
(multi = many) such as some fungi, plants
and animals. Can we find out names of some
more unicellular organisms?
Every multi-cellular organism has come
from a single cell. How? Cells divide to
produce cells of their own kind. All cells thus
come from pre-existing cells.

Activity 5.2
We can try preparing temporary
mounts of leaf peels, tip of roots of
onion or even peels of onions of different
sizes.
After performing the above activity, let
us see what the answers to the following

Activity 5.3
(a) Remove the shell of an egg by
dissolving it in dilute hydrochloric
acid. The shell is mostly calcium
carbonate. A thin outer skin now
encloses the egg. Put the egg in pure
water and observe after 5 minutes.
What do we observe?
The egg swells because water passes
into it by osmosis.
(b) Place a similar de-shelled egg in a
concentrated salt solution and observe
for 5 minutes. The egg shrinks. Why?
Water passes out of the egg solution
into the salt solution because the salt
solution is more concentrated.
We can also try a similar activity with dried
raisins or apricots.

Activity 5.4
Put dried raisins or apricots in plain
water and leave them for some time.
Then place them into a concentrated
solution of sugar or salt. You will
observe the following:
(a) Each gains water and swells
when placed in water.
(b) However, when placed in the
concentrated solution it loses
water, and consequently shrinks.
Unicellular freshwater organisms and
most plant cells tend to gain water through
osmosis. Absorption of water by plant roots
is also an example of osmosis.
Thus, diffusion is important in exhange
of gases and water in the life of a cell. In
additions to this, the cell also obtains
nutrition from its environment. Different
molecules move in and out of the cell
through a type of transport requiring use
of energy.
The plasma membrane is flexible and is
made up of organic molecules called lipids
and proteins. However, we can observe the
structure of the plasma membrane only
through an electron microscope.
The flexibility of the cell membrane also
enables the cell to engulf in food and other
material from its external environment. Such
processes are known as endocytosis. Amoeba
acquires its food through such processes.

Activity 5.5
Find out about electron microscopes
from resources in the school library or
through the internet. Discuss it with
your teacher.

Activity 5.6
Mount the peel of a Rhoeo leaf in water
on a slide and examine cells under
the high power of a microscope. Note
the small green granules, called
chloroplasts. They contain a green
substance called chlorophyll. Put a
strong solution of sugar or salt on the
mounted leaf on the slide. Wait for a
minute and observe under a
microscope. What do we see?
Now place some Rhoeo leaves in boiling
water for a few minutes. This kills the
cells. Then mount one leaf on a slide
and observe it under a microscope. Put
a strong solution of sugar or salt on
the mounted leaf on the slide. Wait for
a minute and observe it again. What
do we find? Did plasmolysis occur now?
THE FUNDAMENTAL UNIT OF LIFE
What do we infer from this activity? It
appears that only living cells, and not dead
cells, are able to absorb water by osmosis.
Cell walls permit the cells of plants, fungi
and bacteria to withstand very dilute
(hypotonic) external media without bursting.
In such media the cells tend to take up water
by osmosis. The cell swells, building up
pressure against the cell wall. The wall exerts
an equal pressure against the swollen cell.
Because of their walls, such cells can
withstand much greater changes in the
surrounding medium than animal cells.

Activity 5.7
Let us take a glass slide with a drop of
water on it. Using an ice-cream spoon
gently scrape the inside surface of the
cheek. Does any material get stuck on
the spoon? With the help of a needle
we can transfer this material and
spread it evenly on the glass slide kept
ready for this. To colour the material
we can put a drop of methylene blue
solution on it. Now the material is ready
for observation under microscope. Do
not forget to put a cover-slip on it!
What do we observe? What is the
shape of the cells we see? Draw it on
the observation sheet.
53
Was there a darkly coloured, spherical
or oval, dot-like structure near the
centre of each cell? This structure is
called nucleus. Were there similar
structures in onion peel cells?
The nucleus has a double layered covering
called nuclear membrane. The nuclear
membrane has pores which allow the transfer
of material from inside the nucleus to its
outside, that is, to the cytoplasm (which we
will talk about in section 5.2.4).
The nucleus contains chromosomes,
which are visible as rod-shaped structures
only when the cell is about to divide.
Chromosomes contain information for
inheritance of characters from parents to next
generation in the form of DNA (Deoxyribo
Nucleic Acid) molecules. Chromosomes are
composed of DNA and protein. DNA molecules
contain the information necessary for
constructing and organising cells. Functional
segments of DNA are called genes. In a cell
which is not dividing, this DNA is present as
part of chromatin material. Chromatin
material is visible as entangled mass of thread
like structures. Whenever the cell is about to
divide, the chromatin material gets organised
into chromosomes.
The nucleus plays a central role in cellular
reproduction, the process by which a single
cell divides and forms two new cells. It also
plays a crucial part, along with the
environment, in determining the way the cell
will develop and what form it will exhibit at
maturity, by directing the chemical activities
of the cell.
In some organisms like bacteria, the
nuclear region of the cell may be poorly
defined due to the absence of a nuclear
membrane. Such an undefined nuclear region
containing only nucleic acids is called a
nucleoid. Such organisms, whose cells lack
a nuclear membrane, are called prokaryotes
(Pro = primitive or primary; karyote ≈ karyon
= nucleus). Organisms with cells having a
nuclear membrane are called eukaryotes.
Prokaryotic cells (see  also lack
most of the other cytoplasmic organelles
54
present in eukaryotic cells. Many of the
functions of such organelles are also
performed by poorly organised parts of the
cytoplasm (see section 5.2.4). The chlorophyll
in photosynthetic prokaryotic bacteria is
associated with membranous vesicles (bag
like structures) but not with plastids as in
eukaryotic cells (see section 5.2.5).
Ribosomes
Plasma
membrane
Cell wall
Nucleoid